---
title: "JDK 1.6.0_21-b06 Eclipse vs. 1.6.0_21-b07 Oracle"
date: 2010-07-28 09:24:00 +0000
layout: post
tags: ["\"Java SE 6 release 21\"", "JDK 7", "eclipse"]
slug: "2010-07-28-jdk-16021-b06-eclipse-vs-16021-b07"
url: /2010/07/jdk-16021-b06-eclipse-vs-16021-b07.html
---

Some confusion today about the latest 1.6.0_21 build. Oracle released the <a href="http://blog.eisele.net/2010/07/java-se-6-release-21-java-hotspot-vm.html">1.6.0_21-b06</a> a few days ago. Beside some new features it also silently introduced one rebranding (With Java 1.6.0_21, the ("\\StringFileInfo\\%04x%04x\\CompanyName") has changed in the java.exe and javaw.exe programs from "Sun Microsystems, Inc" to "Oracle". ). 
<br>
 Any Eclipse version since 3.3 (released 2007) until and including the recent Helios release (2010) has been reported to crash with an OutOfMemoryError, because this flag decided whether the "-XX:MaxPermSize" argument needs to be used or not.(<a href="https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=319514" target="_blank">compare eclipse bug</a> and <a href="http://bugs.sun.com/bugdatabase/view_bug.do?bug_id=6969236" target="_blank">Oracle JDK bug</a>). There are a couple of workarounds available. Most basically they all talk about adding the -XX:MaxPermSize= VM argument manually. (<a href="http://wiki.eclipse.org/FAQ_How_do_I_increase_the_permgen_size_available_to_Eclipse%3F" target="_blank">Find a complete list here</a>.)
<br>
<br>
 This lead to some hard comments within the community and the bottom line was:
<br>
<blockquote>
 Making such a change in a Service Release, that breaks clients like Eclipse
 <br>
  (and probably others) seems like a no-no. Perhaps THEY could take it back and
 <br>
  release a jre 6u21a with the original vendor string. I claim that this can be
 <br>
  filed as a "critical" issue.
 <br>
  (Source: <a href="https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=319514#c22" target="_blank">Martin Oberhuber 2010-07-14 11:01:34 EDT</a> )
 <br>
</blockquote>
<br>
 In consideration to Eclipse and other potentially affected users, Oracle has restored the Windows Company Name property value to "Sun Microsystems". 
<br>
 The change affected only the Windows version of the JRE, not the versions for Solaris and Linux. To accommodate this update the Windows build version will increase from 6u21-b06 to 6u21-b07. Solaris and Linux distributions will continue to ship build 6u21-b06. 
<br>
<br>
 This all feels like it is Oracle to blame again. Partly right:
<br>
 a) for doing changes, that were not documented
<br>
 b) for not testing their "own" products with a major IDE (Eclipse) on a major Dev OS (Windows).
<br>
<br>
 But: It is also true, that the changed field is a platform specific field, which never should have been the basis for any configuration decisions taken in Eclipse. Therefore both parties have failed on this somehow. 
<br>
<br>
 Btw: The JDK7 releases will change all branding from Sun to Oracle, including the java.vendor and java.vm.vendor properties.